Especially when doing workshops at conferences, internet access can be unreliable. If at any time during a workshop session the dashboard doesn't display the workshop content correctly, the browser shows a network error, or the terminals show as having being closed, **do not** refresh the whole browser page. If you refresh the whole browser page, you will end up back at the start of the workshop content and will loose where you were up to. Similarly, if for the workshop an embedded web console for the Kubernetes cluster or other application is being used, you will loose which page you were on.

To reload the terminals, web console, editor, slides or other embedded application, click on the <span class="fas fa-sync-alt"></span> reload button at the top right of the workshop dashboard. You need to have the tab you want to reload selected when you do this. If the workshop environment itself detected that the terminal connection was lost, the button will change to red, irrespective of which tab you are on. To reload the terminal you still need to have the terminal tab selected and the terminal displayed when clicking on reload, even if displayed as red. Select each tab in turn to test whether reload works.

If the workshop content on the left side doesn't display properly or shows as a white page, click on the reload button while holding down the shift key.

Note, do not select the 'Restart Session' option of the dashboard menu if displayed unless absolutely necessary as that will normally reset your whole workshop session and delete it. This will result in you needing to start over and all progress will be lost.
