CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Educates

We welcome contributions from the community and first want to thank you for taking the time to contribute.

Before diving in and trying to make changes to Educates, be aware that the design of the Educates platform is intended to enable many tasks which are not already supported by utilitizing existing capabilities available from a workshop definition in conjunction with distinct custom Kubernetes operators, thereby avoiding the need to add new functionality to the core Educates platform.

If your intention was to make changes that go beyond a simple typo correction or obvious bug fix, we strongly encourage you to initiate a discussion with us first by raising an issue on GitHub. This enables us to assess proposed changes and evaluate whether a change to the core platform is really needed, or if there's a more effective approach to achieve the desired outcome without making the changes. Our primary goal is to see you leverage Educates and be productive using it, without stumbling on working out how to achieve it.

For what could be very minor changes, we acknowledge that it might be more efficient for us to implement the changes, so again feel free to raise a GitHub issue and there's no pressure to create a pull request. 

## Ways to Contribute

We welcome many different types of contributions and not all of them need a pull request. Contributions may include:

* New features and proposals
* Documentation
* Bug fixes
* Issue Triage
* Answering questions and giving feedback
* Helping to onboard new contributors
* Other related activities

## Code of Conduct

Please familiarize yourself with the [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before contributing.

## Contributor License Agreement

Before you start working with Educates, please read our Contributor License Agreement [CLA](https://cla.vmware.com/cla/1/preview). If you wish to contribute code and you have not signed our contributor license agreement (CLA), our bot will update the issue and walk you through the process when you open your first pull request. For any questions about the CLA process, please refer to our [FAQ]([https://cla.vmware.com/faq](https://cla.vmware.com/faq)).

## Getting started

If your primary objective is to use Educates, check out the [Educates user documentation](https://docs.educates.dev/).

If you want to contribute changes to Educates, check out the [Educates developer documentation](developer-docs/README.md).

## Contribution Flow

This is a rough outline of what a contributor's workflow looks like:

* Make a fork of the repository within your GitHub account
* Create a topic branch in your fork from where you want to base your work
* Make commits of logical units
* Make sure your commit messages are with the proper format, quality and descriptiveness (see below)
* Push your changes to the topic branch in your fork
* Create a pull request containing that commit

We follow the GitHub workflow and you can find more details on the [GitHub flow documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/github-flow).

Before submitting your pull request, we advise you to use the following:

### Pull Request Checklist

1. Check if your code changes will pass any code linting checks and unit tests which may be used by the project.
2. Ensure your commit messages are descriptive. We follow the conventions on [How to Write a Git Commit Message](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/). Be sure to include any related GitHub issue references in the commit message. See [GFM syntax](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/#GitHub-flavored-markdown) for referencing issues and commits.
3. Check the commits and commits messages and ensure they are free from typos.

## Reporting Bugs and Creating Issues

For specifics on what to include in your report, please follow the guidelines in the issue and pull request templates when available.

## Asking for Help

The best way to reach us with a question when contributing is to ask on:

* The original GitHub issue

Commit message:

Add note about not including personal or company copyright notices.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Educates

We welcome contributions from the community and first want to thank you for taking the time to contribute.

Before diving in and trying to make changes to Educates, be aware that the design of the Educates platform is intended to enable many tasks which are not already supported by utilitizing existing capabilities available from a workshop definition in conjunction with distinct custom Kubernetes operators, thereby avoiding the need to add new functionality to the core Educates platform.

If your intention was to make changes that go beyond a simple typo correction or obvious bug fix, we strongly encourage you to initiate a discussion with us first by raising an issue on GitHub. This enables us to assess proposed changes and evaluate whether a change to the core platform is really needed, or if there's a more effective approach to achieve the desired outcome without making the changes. Our primary goal is to see you leverage Educates and be productive using it, without stumbling on working out how to achieve it.

For what could be very minor changes, we acknowledge that it might be more efficient for us to implement the changes, so again feel free to raise a GitHub issue and there's no pressure to create a pull request. 

## Ways to Contribute

We welcome many different types of contributions and not all of them need a pull request. Contributions may include:

* New features and proposals
* Documentation
* Bug fixes
* Issue Triage
* Answering questions and giving feedback
* Helping to onboard new contributors
* Other related activities

## Code of Conduct

Please familiarize yourself with the [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) before contributing.

## Contributor License Agreement

Before you start working with Educates, please read our Contributor License Agreement [CLA](https://cla.vmware.com/cla/1/preview). If you wish to contribute code and you have not signed our contributor license agreement (CLA), our bot will update the issue and walk you through the process when you open your first pull request. For any questions about the CLA process, please refer to our [FAQ]([https://cla.vmware.com/faq](https://cla.vmware.com/faq)).

## Getting started

If your primary objective is to use Educates, check out the [Educates user documentation](https://docs.educates.dev/).

If you want to contribute changes to Educates, check out the [Educates developer documentation](developer-docs/README.md).

## Contribution Flow

This is a rough outline of what a contributor's workflow looks like:

* Make a fork of the repository within your GitHub account
* Create a topic branch in your fork from where you want to base your work
* Make commits of logical units
* Make sure your commit messages are with the proper format, quality and descriptiveness (see below)
* Push your changes to the topic branch in your fork
* Create a pull request containing that commit

We follow the GitHub workflow and you can find more details on the [GitHub flow documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/github-flow).

Before submitting your pull request, we advise you to use the following:

### Pull Request Checklist

1. Ensure that you have not included any personal or company copyright notices in any changes. This project relies on a single copyright assignment in the [NOTICE](NOTICE) file with attribution to "The Educates Authors".
2. Ensure your commit messages are descriptive. We aim to follow the conventions on [How to Write a Git Commit Message](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/). Be sure to include any related GitHub issue references in the commit message. See [GFM syntax](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/#GitHub-flavored-markdown) for referencing issues and commits.
3. Check the commits and commits messages and ensure they are free from typos.

## Reporting Bugs and Creating Issues

For specifics on what to include in your report, please follow the guidelines in the issue and pull request templates when available.

## Asking for Help

The best way to reach us with a question when contributing is to ask on:

* The original GitHub issue
