docs/custom-resources/workshop-request.md, before:

Workshop Request
================

The ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource defines a workshop request.

The raw custom resource definition for the ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource can be viewed at:

```
kubectl get crd/workshoprequests.training.educates.dev -o yaml
```

Specifying workshop environment
-------------------------------

The ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource is only used to request a workshop instance. It does not specify actual details needed to perform the deployment of the workshop instance. That information is instead sourced by the Educates operator from the ``WorkshopEnvironment`` and ``Workshop`` custom resources.

The minimum required information in the workshop request is therefore just the name of the workshop environment. This is supplied by setting the ``environment.name`` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: training.educates.dev/v1beta1
kind: WorkshopRequest
metadata:
  name: lab-markdown-sample
spec:
  environment:
    name: lab-markdown-sample
```

A request will only be successful if the ability to request a workshop instance for a workshop environment has been enabled for that workshop. Enabling of requests needs to have been specified in the ``WorkshopEnvironment`` custom resource for the workshop environment.

If multiple workshop requests, whether for the same workshop environment or different ones, are created in the same namespace, the ``name`` defined in the ``metadata`` for the workshop request must be different for each. The value of this name is not important and is not used in naming of workshop instances. A user will need to remember it if they want to delete the workshop instance, which is done by deleting the workshop request.

Specifying required access token
--------------------------------

Where a workshop environment has been configured to require an access token when making workshop request against that environment, it can be specified by setting the ``environment.token`` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: training.educates.dev/v1beta1
kind: WorkshopRequest
metadata:
  name: lab-markdown-sample
spec:
  environment:
    name: lab-markdown-sample
    token: lab-markdown-sample
```

Even with the token, if the workshop environment has restricted the namespaces a workshop request has been made from, and the workshop request was not created in one of the white listed namespaces, the request will fail.

Commit message:

Add deprecation notice for WorkshopRequest custom resource.

docs/custom-resources/workshop-request.md, after:

Workshop Request
================

The ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource defines a workshop request.

The raw custom resource definition for the ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource can be viewed at:

```
kubectl get crd/workshoprequests.training.educates.dev -o yaml
```

Note that the ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource is deprecated and should not be used. As deployment and use of workshops is now all typically managed via a training portal, there is no need to interact with internal custom resources directly such as ``WorkshopEnvironment``, ``WorkshopSession`` and ``WorkshopRequest``. In the case of ``WorkshopRequest``, it may be reimplemented and repurposed at a later time to allow request of workshop sessions via the training portal instance as an alternative to the training portal REST API.

Specifying workshop environment
-------------------------------

The ``WorkshopRequest`` custom resource is only used to request a workshop instance. It does not specify actual details needed to perform the deployment of the workshop instance. That information is instead sourced by the Educates operator from the ``WorkshopEnvironment`` and ``Workshop`` custom resources.

The minimum required information in the workshop request is therefore just the name of the workshop environment. This is supplied by setting the ``environment.name`` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: training.educates.dev/v1beta1
kind: WorkshopRequest
metadata:
  name: lab-markdown-sample
spec:
  environment:
    name: lab-markdown-sample
```

A request will only be successful if the ability to request a workshop instance for a workshop environment has been enabled for that workshop. Enabling of requests needs to have been specified in the ``WorkshopEnvironment`` custom resource for the workshop environment.

If multiple workshop requests, whether for the same workshop environment or different ones, are created in the same namespace, the ``name`` defined in the ``metadata`` for the workshop request must be different for each. The value of this name is not important and is not used in naming of workshop instances. A user will need to remember it if they want to delete the workshop instance, which is done by deleting the workshop request.

Specifying required access token
--------------------------------

Where a workshop environment has been configured to require an access token when making workshop request against that environment, it can be specified by setting the ``environment.token`` field.

```yaml
apiVersion: training.educates.dev/v1beta1
kind: WorkshopRequest
metadata:
  name: lab-markdown-sample
spec:
  environment:
    name: lab-markdown-sample
    token: lab-markdown-sample
```

Even with the token, if the workshop environment has restricted the namespaces a workshop request has been made from, and the workshop request was not created in one of the white listed namespaces, the request will fail.
