docs/getting-started/installing-eduk8s.rst, before:

Installing eduk8s
=================

Before you can start deploying workshops, you need to install a Kubernetes operator for eduk8s. The operator manages the setup of the environment for each workshop and deploys instances of a workshop for each person.

Kubernetes cluster requirements
-------------------------------

The eduk8s operator should be able to be deployed to any Kubernetes cluster supporting custom resource definitions and the concept of operators.

The cluster must have an ingress router configured. You need to ensure if necessary that any timeout specified on the inbound load balancer for the ingress is increased such that long lived websocket connections can be used. Load balancers often only have a 30 second time. If possible configure the timeout which would apply to websockets to be 1 hour.

If deploying the web based training portal, the cluster must have available persistent volumes of type ``ReadWriteOnce (RWO)``. A default storage class must have been defined so that persistent volume claims do not need to specify a storage class. It is required that any storage provider is configured such that a pod running as any user ID (rather than just the root user) can automatically write to the persistent volume.

Testing of eduk8s has mainly been performed using Kubernetes 1.17. It has also been tested with OpenShift 4.3 (equivalent to Kubernetes 1.16).

You need to have cluster admin access in order to install the eduk8s operator.

Deploying the eduk8s operator
-----------------------------

To deploy the operator, run::

    kubectl apply -k "github.com/eduk8s/eduk8s-operator?ref=master"

Note that tagged versions haven't been created as yet, so this is using the latest stable version. Tagging of versions will be setup when the first official release is made.

The command above will create a namespace in your Kubernetes cluster called ``eduk8s`` and the operator along with any required namespaced resources will be created in it. A set of custom resource definitions and a global cluster role binding will also be created. The list of resources you should see being created are::

    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshops.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshopsessions.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshopenvironments.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshoprequests.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/trainingportals.training.eduk8s.io created
    serviceaccount/eduk8s created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/systemprofiles.training.eduk8s.io created
    clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/eduk8s-cluster-admin created
    deployment.apps/eduk8s-operator created

You can check that the operator deployed okay by running::

    kubectl get all -n eduk8s

The pod for the operator should be marked as running.

Specifying the ingress domain
-----------------------------

The operator when deploying instances of the workshop environments needs to be able to expose them via an external URL for access. To define the domain name that can be used as a suffix to hostnames for instances, you need to set the ``INGRESS_DOMAIN`` environment variable on the operator deployment. To do this run::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_DOMAIN=test

Replace ``test`` with the domain name for your Kubernetes cluster. If you do not set this, the ingress created will use ``training.eduk8s.io`` as a default.

For the custom domain you are using, DNS must have been configured with a wildcard domain to forward all requests for sub domains of the custom domain, to the ingress router of the Kubernetes cluster.

If you are running Kubernetes on your local machine using a system like ``minikube`` and you don't have a custom domain name which maps to the IP for the cluster, you can use a ``nip.io`` address.

For example, if ``minikube ip`` returned ``192.168.64.1``, you could use::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_DOMAIN=192.168.64.1.nip.io

Note that you cannot use an address of ``127.0.0.1.nip.io``. This will cause a failure as internal services when needing to connect to each other, would end up connecting to themselves instead, since the address would resolve to the host loopback address of ``127.0.0.1``.

If you are using OpenShift Code Ready Containers, then you would set the ingress domain to be ``apps-crc.testing``

Enforcing secure connections
----------------------------

By default the workshop portal and workshop sessions will be accessible over HTTP connections. If you wish to use secure HTTPS connections, you must have access to a wildcard SSL certificate for the domain under which you wish to host the workshops. You cannot use a self signed certificate.

Wildcard certificates can be created using `letsencrypt <https://letsencrypt.org/>`_. Once you have the certificate, add it as a secret in the ``eduk8s`` namespace. The secret needs to be of type ``tls``. You can create it using the ``kubectl create secret tls`` command.

::

    kubectl create secret tls -n eduk8s training-eduk8s-io --cert=training.eduk8s.io/fullchain.pem --key=training.eduk8s.io/privkey.pem

Having created the secret, if it is the secret corresponding to the default ingress domain you specified above, set the ``INGRESS_SECRET`` environment variable on the operator deployment. This will ensure that it is applied automatically to any ingress created.

::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_SECRET=training-eduk8s-io

If the certificate isn't that of the default ingress domain, you can supply the domain name and name of the secret when creating a workshop environment or training portal. In either case, secrets for the wildcard certificates must be created in the ``eduk8s`` namespace.

Specifying the ingress class
----------------------------

Any ingress routes created will use the default ingress class. If you have multiple ingress class types available, and you need to override which is used, you can set the ``INGRESS_CLASS`` environment variable for the eduk8s operator.

::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_CLASS=nginx

This only applies to the ingress created for each workshop session. It does not apply to the training portal or any ingress created from a workshop.

This may be necessary where a specific ingress provider is not as reliable in maintaining the websocket connections used by the workshop terminals.

Trusting insecure registries
----------------------------

One of the options available for workshops is to automatically deploy an image registry per workshop session. When the eduk8s operator is configured to use a secure ingress with valid wildcard certificate, the image registry will work out of the box.

If the eduk8s operator is not setup to use secure ingress, the image registry will be accessed over HTTP and will be regarded as an insecure registry.

When using the optional support for building container images using ``docker``, the docker daemon deployed for the workshop session will be configured in this case so it knows the image registry is insecure and pushing images to the image registry will still work.

In this case of an insecure image registry, deployment of images from the image registry to the Kubernetes cluster will not however work unless the Kubernetes cluster is configured to trust the insecure registry.

How you configure a Kubernetes cluster to trust an insecure image registry will differ based on how the Kubernetes cluster is deployed and what container runtime it uses.

If you are using ``minikube`` with ``dockerd``, to ensure that the image registry is trusted, you will need to set up the trust the very first time you create the minikube instance.

To do this, first determine which IP subnet minikube uses for the inbound ingress router of the cluster. If you already have a minikube instance running, you can determine this by running ``minikube ip``. If for example this reported ``192.168.64.1``, the subnet used is ``129.168.64.0/24``.

With this information, when you create a fresh ``minikube`` instance you would supply the ``--insecure-registry`` option with the subnet.

::

    minikube start --insecure-registry="129.168.64.0/24"

What this option will do is tell ``dockerd`` to regard any image registry as insecure, which is deployed in the Kubernetes cluster, and which is accessed via a URL exposed via an ingress route of the cluster itself.

Note that at this time there is no known way to configure ``containerd`` to treat image registries matching a wildcard subdomain, or which reside in a subnet, as insecure. It is therefore not possible to run workshops which need to deploy images from the per session image registry when using ``containerd`` as the underlying Kubernetes cluster container runtime. This is a limitation of ``containerd`` and there are no known plans for ``containerd`` to support this ability. This will limit your ability to use Kubernetes clusters deployed with a tool like ``kind``, which relies on using ``containerd``.

Commit message:

Add documentation on system profile custom resource.

docs/getting-started/installing-eduk8s.rst, after:

Installing eduk8s
=================

Before you can start deploying workshops, you need to install a Kubernetes operator for eduk8s. The operator manages the setup of the environment for each workshop and deploys instances of a workshop for each person.

Kubernetes cluster requirements
-------------------------------

The eduk8s operator should be able to be deployed to any Kubernetes cluster supporting custom resource definitions and the concept of operators.

The cluster must have an ingress router configured. You need to ensure if necessary that any timeout specified on the inbound load balancer for the ingress is increased such that long lived websocket connections can be used. Load balancers often only have a 30 second time. If possible configure the timeout which would apply to websockets to be 1 hour.

If deploying the web based training portal, the cluster must have available persistent volumes of type ``ReadWriteOnce (RWO)``. A default storage class must have been defined so that persistent volume claims do not need to specify a storage class. It is required that any storage provider is configured such that a pod running as any user ID (rather than just the root user) can automatically write to the persistent volume.

Testing of eduk8s has mainly been performed using Kubernetes 1.17. It has also been tested with OpenShift 4.3 (equivalent to Kubernetes 1.16).

You need to have cluster admin access in order to install the eduk8s operator.

Deploying the eduk8s operator
-----------------------------

To deploy the operator, run::

    kubectl apply -k "github.com/eduk8s/eduk8s-operator?ref=master"

Note that tagged versions haven't been created as yet, so this is using the latest stable version. Tagging of versions will be setup when the first official release is made.

The command above will create a namespace in your Kubernetes cluster called ``eduk8s`` and the operator along with any required namespaced resources will be created in it. A set of custom resource definitions and a global cluster role binding will also be created. The list of resources you should see being created are::

    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshops.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshopsessions.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshopenvironments.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/workshoprequests.training.eduk8s.io created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/trainingportals.training.eduk8s.io created
    serviceaccount/eduk8s created
    customresourcedefinition.apiextensions.k8s.io/systemprofiles.training.eduk8s.io created
    clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io/eduk8s-cluster-admin created
    deployment.apps/eduk8s-operator created

You can check that the operator deployed okay by running::

    kubectl get all -n eduk8s

The pod for the operator should be marked as running.

Specifying the ingress domain
-----------------------------

The operator when deploying instances of the workshop environments needs to be able to expose them via an external URL for access. To define the domain name that can be used as a suffix to hostnames for instances, you can set the ``INGRESS_DOMAIN`` environment variable on the operator deployment. To do this run::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_DOMAIN=test

Replace ``test`` with the domain name for your Kubernetes cluster. If you do not set this, the ingress created will use ``training.eduk8s.io`` as a default.

Note that use of environment variables to configure the operator is a short cut to cater for the simple use case. For more complicated scenarios a custom resource is provided to configure the operator. See documentation on the :ref:`system-profile-resource` custom resource for more details.

For the custom domain you are using, DNS must have been configured with a wildcard domain to forward all requests for sub domains of the custom domain, to the ingress router of the Kubernetes cluster.

If you are running Kubernetes on your local machine using a system like ``minikube`` and you don't have a custom domain name which maps to the IP for the cluster, you can use a ``nip.io`` address.

For example, if ``minikube ip`` returned ``192.168.64.1``, you could use::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_DOMAIN=192.168.64.1.nip.io

Note that you cannot use an address of ``127.0.0.1.nip.io``. This will cause a failure as internal services when needing to connect to each other, would end up connecting to themselves instead, since the address would resolve to the host loopback address of ``127.0.0.1``.

If you are using OpenShift Code Ready Containers, then you would set the ingress domain to be ``apps-crc.testing``

Enforcing secure connections
----------------------------

By default the workshop portal and workshop sessions will be accessible over HTTP connections. If you wish to use secure HTTPS connections, you must have access to a wildcard SSL certificate for the domain under which you wish to host the workshops. You cannot use a self signed certificate.

Wildcard certificates can be created using `letsencrypt <https://letsencrypt.org/>`_. Once you have the certificate, add it as a secret in the ``eduk8s`` namespace. The secret needs to be of type ``tls``. You can create it using the ``kubectl create secret tls`` command.

::

    kubectl create secret tls -n eduk8s training-eduk8s-io --cert=training.eduk8s.io/fullchain.pem --key=training.eduk8s.io/privkey.pem

Having created the secret, if it is the secret corresponding to the default ingress domain you specified above, set the ``INGRESS_SECRET`` environment variable on the operator deployment. This will ensure that it is applied automatically to any ingress created.

::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_SECRET=training-eduk8s-io

If the certificate isn't that of the default ingress domain, you can supply the domain name and name of the secret when creating a workshop environment or training portal. In either case, secrets for the wildcard certificates must be created in the ``eduk8s`` namespace.

Specifying the ingress class
----------------------------

Any ingress routes created will use the default ingress class. If you have multiple ingress class types available, and you need to override which is used, you can set the ``INGRESS_CLASS`` environment variable for the eduk8s operator.

::

    kubectl set env deployment/eduk8s-operator -n eduk8s INGRESS_CLASS=nginx

This only applies to the ingress created for each workshop session. It does not apply to the training portal or any ingress created from a workshop.

This may be necessary where a specific ingress provider is not as reliable in maintaining the websocket connections used by the workshop terminals.

Trusting insecure registries
----------------------------

One of the options available for workshops is to automatically deploy an image registry per workshop session. When the eduk8s operator is configured to use a secure ingress with valid wildcard certificate, the image registry will work out of the box.

If the eduk8s operator is not setup to use secure ingress, the image registry will be accessed over HTTP and will be regarded as an insecure registry.

When using the optional support for building container images using ``docker``, the docker daemon deployed for the workshop session will be configured in this case so it knows the image registry is insecure and pushing images to the image registry will still work.

In this case of an insecure image registry, deployment of images from the image registry to the Kubernetes cluster will not however work unless the Kubernetes cluster is configured to trust the insecure registry.

How you configure a Kubernetes cluster to trust an insecure image registry will differ based on how the Kubernetes cluster is deployed and what container runtime it uses.

If you are using ``minikube`` with ``dockerd``, to ensure that the image registry is trusted, you will need to set up the trust the very first time you create the minikube instance.

To do this, first determine which IP subnet minikube uses for the inbound ingress router of the cluster. If you already have a minikube instance running, you can determine this by running ``minikube ip``. If for example this reported ``192.168.64.1``, the subnet used is ``129.168.64.0/24``.

With this information, when you create a fresh ``minikube`` instance you would supply the ``--insecure-registry`` option with the subnet.

::

    minikube start --insecure-registry="129.168.64.0/24"

What this option will do is tell ``dockerd`` to regard any image registry as insecure, which is deployed in the Kubernetes cluster, and which is accessed via a URL exposed via an ingress route of the cluster itself.

Note that at this time there is no known way to configure ``containerd`` to treat image registries matching a wildcard subdomain, or which reside in a subnet, as insecure. It is therefore not possible to run workshops which need to deploy images from the per session image registry when using ``containerd`` as the underlying Kubernetes cluster container runtime. This is a limitation of ``containerd`` and there are no known plans for ``containerd`` to support this ability. This will limit your ability to use Kubernetes clusters deployed with a tool like ``kind``, which relies on using ``containerd``.
