docs/getting-started/local-environment.md, before:

(local-environment)=
Local Environment
=================

For local development of workshop content the Educates command line tool provides a means for creating a local Kubernetes cluster using Kind, running Educates. This includes an image registry for storing workshop content files and custom workshop base images. The out of the box configuration for the local environment uses a `nip.io` address for access, but it can be configured to use a custom ingress domain and corresponding TLS certficate.

Creating the cluster
--------------------

To create a local Kubernetes cluster using Kind and deploy Educates, run the command:

```
educates create-cluster
```

Deleting the cluster
--------------------

If you are done with the local environment and want to delete the Kubernetes cluster, run:

```
educates delete-cluster
```

You can then run `educates create-cluster` to recreate the Kubernetes cluster.

If you know you do not intend to recreate the Kubernetes cluster, and so want everything deleted, you can run:

```
educates delete-cluster --all
```

This will also delete the local image registry and DNS resolver if deployed.

Reinstalling Educates
---------------------

When you run the `educates create-cluster` script to create the local Kubernetes cluster, it will also install Educates. If you wish to delete and reinstall just Educates after the cluster has been created, first run:

```
educates admin platform delete
```

To deploy Educates again, you can then run:

```
educates admin platform deploy
```

Custom configuration
--------------------

If you want to provide overrides to the automatically generated configuration for Educates, you can supply a YAML data values file via the `--config` option when running `educates create-cluster` or `educates admin platform deploy` commands.

Alternatively, you can provide a global set of defaults for the YAML data values by running:

```
educates admin config edit
```

and entering the YAML data values.

You can view what actual YAML data values will be used for the configuration when doing a deployment of Educates by running:

```
educates admin config view
```

The `--config` option can also be supplied to this command if desired.

Local image registry
--------------------

When you run the `educates create-cluster` command to create the local Kubernetes cluster, it will also deploy an image registry to your local docker environment. This is used for storing workshop content files and custom workshop base images. The Educates command line tool can be used to publish the workshop content files to this image registry.

If you want to use the registry to store other images, you should tag your images with the registry host/port of `localhost:5001`, then push the image to the registry. If you want to pull images from the registry in deployments created in the Kubernetes cluster, you should use the registry host/port of `registry.default.svc.cluster.local:5001` in the deployment resources created inside of the Kubernetes cluster.

So that the same host name is used on the local machine as in the cluster, you could if you want create an entry in the `/etc/hosts` file of you local machine for `registry.default.svc.cluster.local` which maps to `127.0.0.1`.

If you wish to delete and reinstall the registry after the cluster has been created, you can run:

```
educates admin registry delete
```

To deploy the registry again, you can then run:

```
educates admin registry deploy
```

Custom ingress domain
---------------------

By default when deployed to the Kubernetes cluster of the local environment, Educates will be configured to use a `nip.io` address for the ingress domain, as a wildcard domain.

This works but because it is not possible to obtain a TLS certificate for a `nip.io` address, and as such it is not possible to use secure ingresses, some features of the workshop environment will not work. This includes the inability to use a per session image registry, which requires a secure ingress to be trusted by the Kubernetes cluster and other tools which work with registries.

Instead of relying on a `nip.io` address you have two options:

* Use your own domain that you control and for which you can generate yourself a wildcard TLS certificate. For example, you might own the domain `workshops.mydomain.com`, in which case you could use a wildcard TLS certificate for `*.workshops.mydomain.com`. You will also need to be able to configure DNS for the domain, or be able to set up a local DNS resolver on your local machine.

* Use the `educates-local-dev.xyz` domain. This will require that you obtain a copy of a wildcard TLS certificate for that domain from the Educates team. You will also need to be able to set up a local DNS resolver on your local machine.

To use a custom ingress domain, when running `educates create-cluster` you can supply the `--domain` option to pass the domain name.

Alternatively, you can run `educates admin config edit` and add the configuration for the ingress domain as part of the global defaults.

```yaml
clusterIngress:
  domain: educates-local-dev.xyz
```

This will still only allow HTTP as is and will not use a secure ingress. If you want to use secure ingress you need to provide the corresponding wildcard TLS certificate.

If you had used certbot to create a wildcard TLS certificate using a DNS challenge, you could then configure Educates to know about it and use it by running:

```
educates admin secrets add tls ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}-tls \
 --cert $HOME/.letsencrypt/config/live/${INGRESS_DOMAIN}/fullchain.pem \
 --key $HOME/.letsencrypt/config/live/${INGRESS_DOMAIN}/privkey.pem \
 --domain ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}
```

The `--domain` option must be used to indicate the domain the wildcard TLS certificate is for, as the name of the secret is not significant. You can if necessary add multiple wildcard TLS certificates for different domains under different names. The TLS certificate annotated with the domain name which matches the `clusterIngress.domain` setting will be used.

Now when Educates is deployed using `educates create-cluster`, or later if using `educates admin platform deploy` to reinstall Educates, this custom ingress domain and wildcard TLS certificate will be used.

Note that DNS still needs to be configured to map using a CNAME the wildcard domain to the IP address of your local host machine where the Kubernetes cluster is running. This could be done by modifying your actual DNS registry, or you can run a local DNS resolver. If doing this in your global DNS registry, it doesn't matter that the IP address is a local network address which is not accessible to the internet, although depending on what internet router you use for a home network, you may need to disable DNS rebinding protection in your router for the domain.

Local DNS resolver
------------------

The alternative to setting up a global DNS registry to map the wildcard domain to the IP address of your local host machine, is to run a local DNS resolver for the ingress domain. This requires being able to run `dnsmasq` or equivalent locally and configuring the local DNS resolution to forward lookups for the ingress domain to the local DNS resolver.

If you are on macOS, the Educates command line tool provides the means to run `dnsmasq` for you with the required configuration. To start this run:

```
educates admin resolver deploy
```

This will run the `dnsmasq` instance in the local docker daemon instance.

Next ensure that the directory `/etc/resolver` exists:

```
sudo mkdir /etc/resolver
```

In that directory create a file with name the same as the ingress domain, with `nameserver` entry pointing at `127.0.0.1`.

```
sudo sh -c "cat > /etc/resolver/${INGRESS_DOMAIN} << EOF
nameserver 127.0.0.1
EOF"
```

To test that the DNS resolver is working correctly run:

```
scutil --dns www.${INGRESS_DOMAIN}
```

You should see an entry like the following for your ingress domain:

```
resolver #8
  domain   : educates-local.dev.xyz
  nameserver[0] : 127.0.0.1
  flags    : Request A records, Request AAAA records
  reach    : 0x00030002 (Reachable,Local Address,Directly Reachable Address)
```

Note that tools like `nslookup` and `dig` do not use the local DNS resolver so don't expect them to show a result. You can instead use `curl` to test a host within the ingress domain. You should get a HTTP 404 response, which will be the default response from the Kubernetes ingress controller, since there will not be any ingress configured to respond to the request.

```
$ curl -v www.educates-local.dev.xyz
*   Trying 192.168.168.1:80...
* Connected to www.educates-local.dev.xyz (192.168.168.1) port 80 (#0)
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.educates-local.dev.xyz
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
< vary: Accept-Encoding
< date: Fri, 25 Mar 2022 03:07:19 GMT
< server: envoy
< content-length: 0
< 
* Connection #0 to host www.educates-local.dev.xyz left intact
```

The IP address used as the target for addresses resolved by the local DNS resolver will be the IP address of the primary active network interface for the local host. If you want to override the IP address and change it to use an alternate IP, such as that used by an alias applied to a network interface using the ``ifconfig INTERFACE alias`` command, you can edit the local Educates config using the command ``educates admin config edit`` and add configuration in the following form before deploying the local DNS resolver.

```yaml
localDNSResolver:
  targetAddress: 192.168.168.1
```

By default the local DNS resolver will only resolve the domain for the Educates ingress domain. If you want it to resolve other domains and also have them directed to the IP address used for accessing the local Educates cluster, you can also add them in the local Educates config.

```yaml
localDNSResolver:
  extraDomains:
  - example.com
```

Linux systems may already provide a local DNS resolver in which case you can configure it, however how that is done will depend on the Linux distributions.

If the Linux distribution uses a `dnsmasq` server as the local DNS resolver, it should be configured with an entry like the following:

```
address=/educates-local.dev.xyz/192.168.168.1
```

where your ingress domain is mapped to the IP address of your local machine.

When done with the local environment and you want to delete the local DNS resolver if started on macOS, you can run:

```
educates admin resolver delete
```

You will need to manually remove the file you created under `/etc/resolver`.

Commit message:

Add details on how to provide CA certificate when using educates CLI.

docs/getting-started/local-environment.md, after:

(local-environment)=
Local Environment
=================

For local development of workshop content the Educates command line tool provides a means for creating a local Kubernetes cluster using Kind, running Educates. This includes an image registry for storing workshop content files and custom workshop base images. The out of the box configuration for the local environment uses a `nip.io` address for access, but it can be configured to use a custom ingress domain and corresponding TLS certficate.

Creating the cluster
--------------------

To create a local Kubernetes cluster using Kind and deploy Educates, run the command:

```
educates create-cluster
```

Deleting the cluster
--------------------

If you are done with the local environment and want to delete the Kubernetes cluster, run:

```
educates delete-cluster
```

You can then run `educates create-cluster` to recreate the Kubernetes cluster.

If you know you do not intend to recreate the Kubernetes cluster, and so want everything deleted, you can run:

```
educates delete-cluster --all
```

This will also delete the local image registry and DNS resolver if deployed.

Reinstalling Educates
---------------------

When you run the `educates create-cluster` script to create the local Kubernetes cluster, it will also install Educates. If you wish to delete and reinstall just Educates after the cluster has been created, first run:

```
educates admin platform delete
```

To deploy Educates again, you can then run:

```
educates admin platform deploy
```

Custom configuration
--------------------

If you want to provide overrides to the automatically generated configuration for Educates, you can supply a YAML data values file via the `--config` option when running `educates create-cluster` or `educates admin platform deploy` commands.

Alternatively, you can provide a global set of defaults for the YAML data values by running:

```
educates admin config edit
```

and entering the YAML data values.

You can view what actual YAML data values will be used for the configuration when doing a deployment of Educates by running:

```
educates admin config view
```

The `--config` option can also be supplied to this command if desired.

Local image registry
--------------------

When you run the `educates create-cluster` command to create the local Kubernetes cluster, it will also deploy an image registry to your local docker environment. This is used for storing workshop content files and custom workshop base images. The Educates command line tool can be used to publish the workshop content files to this image registry.

If you want to use the registry to store other images, you should tag your images with the registry host/port of `localhost:5001`, then push the image to the registry. If you want to pull images from the registry in deployments created in the Kubernetes cluster, you should use the registry host/port of `registry.default.svc.cluster.local:5001` in the deployment resources created inside of the Kubernetes cluster.

So that the same host name is used on the local machine as in the cluster, you could if you want create an entry in the `/etc/hosts` file of you local machine for `registry.default.svc.cluster.local` which maps to `127.0.0.1`.

If you wish to delete and reinstall the registry after the cluster has been created, you can run:

```
educates admin registry delete
```

To deploy the registry again, you can then run:

```
educates admin registry deploy
```

Custom ingress domain
---------------------

By default when deployed to the Kubernetes cluster of the local environment, Educates will be configured to use a `nip.io` address for the ingress domain, as a wildcard domain.

This works but because it is not possible to obtain a TLS certificate for a `nip.io` address, and as such it is not possible to use secure ingresses, some features of the workshop environment will not work. This includes the inability to use a per session image registry, which requires a secure ingress to be trusted by the Kubernetes cluster and other tools which work with registries.

Instead of relying on a `nip.io` address you have two options:

* Use your own domain that you control and for which you can generate yourself a wildcard TLS certificate. For example, you might own the domain `workshops.mydomain.com`, in which case you could use a wildcard TLS certificate for `*.workshops.mydomain.com`. You will also need to be able to configure DNS for the domain, or be able to set up a local DNS resolver on your local machine.

* Use the `educates-local-dev.xyz` domain. This will require that you obtain a copy of a wildcard TLS certificate for that domain from the Educates team. You will also need to be able to set up a local DNS resolver on your local machine.

To use a custom ingress domain, when running `educates create-cluster` you can supply the `--domain` option to pass the domain name.

Alternatively, you can run `educates admin config edit` and add the configuration for the ingress domain as part of the global defaults.

```yaml
clusterIngress:
  domain: educates-local-dev.xyz
```

This will still only allow HTTP as is and will not use a secure ingress. If you want to use secure ingress you need to provide the corresponding wildcard TLS certificate.

If you had used certbot to create a wildcard TLS certificate using a DNS challenge, you could then configure Educates to know about it and use it by running:

```
educates admin secrets add tls ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}-tls \
 --cert $HOME/.letsencrypt/config/live/${INGRESS_DOMAIN}/fullchain.pem \
 --key $HOME/.letsencrypt/config/live/${INGRESS_DOMAIN}/privkey.pem \
 --domain ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}
```

The `--domain` option must be used to indicate the domain the wildcard TLS certificate is for, as the name of the secret is not significant. You can if necessary add multiple wildcard TLS certificates for different domains under different names. The TLS certificate annotated with the domain name which matches the `clusterIngress.domain` setting will be used.

If the wildcard TLS certificate is self signed using your own certificate authority (CA) certificate, you would still use the above command to add the TLS certificate for Educates to use, but supply the location of where you had saved the corresponding files. You can then provide the CA certificate for Educates to use by running:

```
educates admin secrets add ca ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}-ca \
 --cert "`mkcert -CAROOT`/rootCA.pem" \
 --domain ${INGRESS_DOMAIN}
```

In this example, it was assumed that ``mkcert`` had been used to create the CA certificate and wildcard TLS certificate and thus we run ``mkcert`` to determine where the CA certificate was stored.

Now when Educates is deployed using `educates create-cluster`, or later if using `educates admin platform deploy` to reinstall Educates, this custom ingress domain and wildcard TLS certificate, and optionally the CA certificate if one provided, will be used.

Note that DNS still needs to be configured to map using a CNAME the wildcard domain to the IP address of your local host machine where the Kubernetes cluster is running. This could be done by modifying your actual DNS registry, or you can run a local DNS resolver. If doing this in your global DNS registry, it doesn't matter that the IP address is a local network address which is not accessible to the internet, although depending on what internet router you use for a home network, you may need to disable DNS rebinding protection in your router for the domain.

Local DNS resolver
------------------

The alternative to setting up a global DNS registry to map the wildcard domain to the IP address of your local host machine, is to run a local DNS resolver for the ingress domain. This requires being able to run `dnsmasq` or equivalent locally and configuring the local DNS resolution to forward lookups for the ingress domain to the local DNS resolver.

If you are on macOS, the Educates command line tool provides the means to run `dnsmasq` for you with the required configuration. To start this run:

```
educates admin resolver deploy
```

This will run the `dnsmasq` instance in the local docker daemon instance.

Next ensure that the directory `/etc/resolver` exists:

```
sudo mkdir /etc/resolver
```

In that directory create a file with name the same as the ingress domain, with `nameserver` entry pointing at `127.0.0.1`.

```
sudo sh -c "cat > /etc/resolver/${INGRESS_DOMAIN} << EOF
nameserver 127.0.0.1
EOF"
```

To test that the DNS resolver is working correctly run:

```
scutil --dns www.${INGRESS_DOMAIN}
```

You should see an entry like the following for your ingress domain:

```
resolver #8
  domain   : educates-local.dev.xyz
  nameserver[0] : 127.0.0.1
  flags    : Request A records, Request AAAA records
  reach    : 0x00030002 (Reachable,Local Address,Directly Reachable Address)
```

Note that tools like `nslookup` and `dig` do not use the local DNS resolver so don't expect them to show a result. You can instead use `curl` to test a host within the ingress domain. You should get a HTTP 404 response, which will be the default response from the Kubernetes ingress controller, since there will not be any ingress configured to respond to the request.

```
$ curl -v www.educates-local.dev.xyz
*   Trying 192.168.168.1:80...
* Connected to www.educates-local.dev.xyz (192.168.168.1) port 80 (#0)
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: www.educates-local.dev.xyz
> User-Agent: curl/7.79.1
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found
< vary: Accept-Encoding
< date: Fri, 25 Mar 2022 03:07:19 GMT
< server: envoy
< content-length: 0
< 
* Connection #0 to host www.educates-local.dev.xyz left intact
```

The IP address used as the target for addresses resolved by the local DNS resolver will be the IP address of the primary active network interface for the local host. If you want to override the IP address and change it to use an alternate IP, such as that used by an alias applied to a network interface using the ``ifconfig INTERFACE alias`` command, you can edit the local Educates config using the command ``educates admin config edit`` and add configuration in the following form before deploying the local DNS resolver.

```yaml
localDNSResolver:
  targetAddress: 192.168.168.1
```

By default the local DNS resolver will only resolve the domain for the Educates ingress domain. If you want it to resolve other domains and also have them directed to the IP address used for accessing the local Educates cluster, you can also add them in the local Educates config.

```yaml
localDNSResolver:
  extraDomains:
  - example.com
```

Linux systems may already provide a local DNS resolver in which case you can configure it, however how that is done will depend on the Linux distributions.

If the Linux distribution uses a `dnsmasq` server as the local DNS resolver, it should be configured with an entry like the following:

```
address=/educates-local.dev.xyz/192.168.168.1
```

where your ingress domain is mapped to the IP address of your local machine.

When done with the local environment and you want to delete the local DNS resolver if started on macOS, you can run:

```
educates admin resolver delete
```

You will need to manually remove the file you created under `/etc/resolver`.
